=head1 NAME

RipHtml


=head1 SYNOPSIS

    ripHtml.pl pathname [ pathname ... ]

Html file format text extraction and reintegration script. The output from this script is intended for use by a software localisation translator.


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Currently the script only looks for free text in the Html text and ALT properties of the <A> tags therein. Support for strings within embedded scripts is under development, but as these are highly context dependant and require a human reader to infere meaning from them. A suitable class libaray is being developed to narrow down selections to sensible strings.

During the extraction process the program scans each file, tokenises the necessary text and saves the token/string pairs into a tab-delimited text file. This text file is passed to the translator for editing. As the file is essentially a table, the translator can open it in Microsoft Word, and choose "Convert Text to Table" from the "Table" menu.

The first column in the table contains tokens, these are for internal use only and should be ignored; they B<must not> be modified.

The text extracted should not contain any Html tags, however it may contain Html Entity Tags. These tags are used to represent special characters that are not in the low-ascii character set, or are reserved in regular Html. To decode these entity tags, please use a suitable reference. You can find a reference table in I<Html: The Definitive Guide>, from I<O'Reilly and Associates>.

Occasionally some material may get extracted that should not be edited; please ignore this, or better still send me a bug report. The main reason why this happens is that web site development is progressing at an exceptional rate; with new languages and tools appearing constantly. This means that a complex web page may contain lots of different kinds of code and server directives. Whenever something radically new comes along, I may need to modify the program to take it into account.


=head1 USAGE

Run the script, giving directory pathnames as arguments. More than one directory may be processed in a session.

Each directory is processed in turn. A new directory is created, the I<Mirror>, with the same name as the original; the mirror has a tilde appended.

The original directory now contains ripped files, with each string replaced with a special token value. The mirror contains the tab-delimited text files.

Edit the files in the mirror directory and re-run the script; using the original arguments. The contents of the tab-delimited text files are merged into the ripped files. As each mirror directory is processed, its trailing tilde is changed to an exclamation mark, flagging the directory as processed.

The files in the original directory should now contain the new text strings.


=head1 COPYING

Copyright (C) 2000 Jason Holland

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA


=head1 AUTHOR

Jason Holland I<jason.holland@dial.pipex.com>
